Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
nerve conduction and synaptic transmission.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Describe the structure of a peripheral nerve fibre.
A peripheral nerve fibre is an axon,
the elongated process of a neurone that conducts the action potential,
together with its supporting sheath. The axon is a cylinder of axoplasm bounded by
the excitable axolemma, containing the ion channels for conduction.
Many axons are myelinated: a Schwann cell wraps the axon repeatedly in concentric
layers of lipid-rich membrane forming the myelin sheath, which insulates the fibre,
interrupted at regular intervals by the nodes of Ranvier where the membrane is
exposed and the sodium channels concentrated.
Other axons are unmyelinated, several being enclosed by a single Schwann cell
without the multiple wrappings.
Peripheral nerves bundle many such fibres within connective-tissue sheaths — the
endoneurium around each fibre, the perineurium around fascicles,
and the epineurium around the whole nerve.
So a peripheral nerve fibre is an axon with its excitable membrane,
myelinated by concentric Schwann-cell wrapping interrupted at the nodes of Ranvier,
or unmyelinated, bundled with others in connective-tissue sheaths — a structure
adapted for conduction and relevant to nerve blockade.
How are nerve fibres classified?
Nerve fibres are classified by their diameter, myelination and conduction velocity,
which correlate with their function, in a scheme of letters.
The type A fibres are large, myelinated and fast,
subdivided into A-alpha — the fastest, carrying motor output and proprioception;
A-beta — touch and pressure; A-gamma — to muscle spindles; and A-delta — smaller,
carrying fast, sharp pain and temperature.
The type B fibres are small, myelinated and slower,
being the preganglionic autonomic fibres. The type C fibres are the smallest,
unmyelinated and slowest, carrying slow, dull pain,
temperature and postganglionic autonomic output.
An alternative numerical scheme, one to four, classifies sensory afferents.
The classification matters because fibre type determines conduction speed,
function, and susceptibility to block.
So nerve fibres are classified as A fibres — large, myelinated, fast,
subdivided alpha to delta by function — B fibres,
small myelinated preganglionic autonomic, and C fibres, the smallest,
unmyelinated and slowest carrying dull pain and postganglionic autonomic traffic,
the scheme linking structure, speed and function.
Describe the differential susceptibility of nerve fibres to block.
Different fibre types are blocked at different rates and by different agents,
which has important clinical consequences.
With local anaesthetics, smaller and myelinated fibres are generally blocked before
larger ones, and the clinical order of loss is typically autonomic function first,
then pain and temperature, then touch and pressure,
then motor power and proprioception last,
with recovery in the reverse order — so a differential block can provide analgesia
with some preserved motor function.
The small myelinated B and A-delta and the C fibres are sensitive.
With compression or ischaemia, by contrast,
the large myelinated fibres tend to be affected first,
so pressure palsies lose motor and proprioceptive function early.
This differential explains the clinical patterns seen in regional anaesthesia and
in nerve injury.
So nerve fibres show differential susceptibility:
local anaesthetics tend to block autonomic, then pain and temperature, then touch,
then motor in that order, allowing differential sensory-motor block,
whereas compression affects large fibres first — patterns important in regional
anaesthesia and nerve injury.
Distinguish electrical and chemical synapses,
and outline why chemical synapses predominate.
A synapse is the junction at which a signal passes from one neurone to another cell.
Electrical synapses connect cells directly through gap junctions — channels that
allow ions and current to flow straight from one cell to the next — giving very
fast, bidirectional transmission with no delay,
found where rapid synchronous activity is needed,
as in some cardiac and smooth muscle.
Chemical synapses, which predominate in the nervous system,
transmit by releasing a chemical neurotransmitter across a synaptic cleft to act on
receptors on the next cell.
Although slower, with a synaptic delay, chemical synapses offer crucial advantages:
they are unidirectional, they can amplify a signal,
and above all they can integrate and modulate — being either excitatory or
inhibitory, summing many inputs, and being subject to facilitation,
depression and pharmacological modification.
So electrical synapses give fast, direct,
bidirectional coupling through gap junctions,
but chemical synapses predominate because, despite their delay,
they allow unidirectional, amplifiable,
integrative and modifiable transmission — the basis of nervous-system computation
and of pharmacological intervention.
Describe the sequence of events in chemical synaptic transmission.
Chemical synaptic transmission proceeds in an orderly sequence.
The action potential arrives at the presynaptic terminal and depolarises it.
This opens voltage-gated calcium channels,
and calcium enters the terminal down its steep electrochemical gradient.
The rise in intracellular calcium triggers the fusion of
neurotransmitter-containing vesicles with the presynaptic membrane,
releasing the transmitter into the synaptic cleft by exocytosis.
The transmitter diffuses across the cleft and binds receptors on the postsynaptic
membrane.
If these are ligand-gated ion channels, they open,
producing a postsynaptic potential — depolarising and excitatory,
or hyperpolarising and inhibitory, depending on the ions and the transmitter.
The signal is then terminated by removal of the transmitter.
So chemical synaptic transmission is the sequence:
action potential depolarises the terminal, voltage-gated calcium channels open,
calcium triggers vesicle fusion and transmitter release,
the transmitter crosses the cleft to bind postsynaptic receptors producing an
excitatory or inhibitory potential,
and the transmitter is then cleared — with calcium entry the crucial trigger
linking the electrical signal to chemical release.
Describe the main neurotransmitters and whether they are excitatory or inhibitory.
Neurotransmitters are the chemical messengers of chemical synapses,
and their effect depends on the receptor they act on.
Acetylcholine is the transmitter at the neuromuscular junction,
at autonomic ganglia and at parasympathetic effectors, and in parts of the brain,
generally excitatory at these sites.
Glutamate is the principal excitatory transmitter of the central nervous system,
acting on receptors including the AMPA and NMDA receptors.
Gamma-aminobutyric acid is the principal inhibitory transmitter of the brain,
and glycine the main inhibitory transmitter of the spinal cord,
both generally opening chloride channels to hyperpolarise the cell.
The monoamines — noradrenaline, dopamine,
serotonin — and others act largely through G-protein-coupled receptors to modulate
activity.
So the main neurotransmitters are acetylcholine,
excitatory at the neuromuscular junction and autonomic sites; glutamate,
the chief excitatory transmitter of the brain; gamma-aminobutyric acid and glycine,
the chief inhibitory transmitters; and the modulatory monoamines — the same
transmitter being excitatory or inhibitory according to its receptor,
which is central to neuropharmacology.
Describe postsynaptic potentials and summation.
When a neurotransmitter acts on the postsynaptic membrane it produces a graded
change in membrane potential, a postsynaptic potential.
An excitatory postsynaptic potential is a depolarisation,
bringing the cell nearer to threshold, typically by opening cation channels;
an inhibitory postsynaptic potential is a hyperpolarisation,
taking it further from threshold, typically by opening chloride or potassium
channels.
Unlike the all-or-none action potential, these are graded and local.
A single one is usually too small to reach threshold,
so the postsynaptic cell sums its many inputs — integration.
Temporal summation is the adding-together of successive potentials from one input
arriving in rapid succession; spatial summation is the adding-together of
potentials from many inputs arriving at once at different sites.
If the net depolarisation at the axon hillock reaches threshold,
an action potential is fired.
So postsynaptic potentials are graded excitatory depolarisations or inhibitory
hyperpolarisations that the neurone integrates by temporal summation, over time,
and spatial summation, across inputs — firing an action potential only if their sum
reaches threshold, the basis of neuronal computation.
How is synaptic transmission terminated?
Transmission must be terminated promptly so that the synapse can transmit discrete,
repeated signals, and this is achieved by rapidly removing the neurotransmitter
from the cleft by one or more mechanisms, depending on the transmitter.
The first is enzymatic degradation:
acetylcholine is rapidly hydrolysed in the cleft by acetylcholinesterase,
the basis of the action of anticholinesterase drugs that prolong its effect.
The second, and the main route for many transmitters, is reuptake:
the transmitter is actively transported back into the presynaptic terminal or into
glial cells by specific carriers — the reuptake of noradrenaline and of serotonin
being the target of important drug classes.
The third is simple diffusion of the transmitter away from the cleft.
So synaptic transmission is terminated by removing the transmitter — by enzymatic
degradation, as acetylcholinesterase hydrolyses acetylcholine;
by reuptake into the terminal or glia, the main route for the monoamines;
and by diffusion — mechanisms that reset the synapse and are widely exploited by
drugs such as the anticholinesterases and reuptake inhibitors.
What is the relevance of synaptic transmission to anaesthesia?
Synaptic transmission is a principal site of action of anaesthetic and analgesic
drugs, and understanding it underlies neuropharmacology.
Many general anaesthetics act by enhancing inhibitory transmission,
particularly by potentiating the gamma-aminobutyric acid type-A receptor — the
chloride channel — as do benzodiazepines, propofol and the volatile agents;
ketamine and nitrous oxide instead block the excitatory NMDA glutamate receptor.
At the neuromuscular junction, the neuromuscular blocking drugs act on the
postsynaptic nicotinic acetylcholine receptor,
and the anticholinesterases prolong acetylcholine by inhibiting its degradation.
Opioids act presynaptically and postsynaptically to inhibit transmission in pain
pathways. The differential block of nerve fibres governs regional anaesthesia.
So synaptic transmission is central to anaesthesia:
general anaesthetics largely enhance gamma-aminobutyric acid inhibition or block
NMDA excitation, neuromuscular blockers and anticholinesterases act at the
neuromuscular junction, and opioids inhibit pain-pathway synapses — the synapse
being where most anaesthetic drugs ultimately act.
Pull it together: trace a signal from nerve to its synaptic target.
I would trace it as a sequence linking conduction and transmission.
A stimulus generates an action potential,
which propagates along the axon — continuously in unmyelinated fibres,
or rapidly and saltatorily between the nodes of Ranvier in myelinated fibres,
the speed set by myelination and diameter,
and the fibre type determining its function and susceptibility to block.
On reaching the presynaptic terminal,
the action potential opens voltage-gated calcium channels;
the calcium influx triggers vesicle fusion and neurotransmitter release into the
cleft.
The transmitter binds postsynaptic receptors,
producing excitatory or inhibitory postsynaptic potentials,
which the target cell integrates by temporal and spatial summation;
if threshold is reached, a new action potential fires.
The transmitter is then cleared.
Drugs act at conduction and at every step of transmission.
So a signal travels as a propagated action potential along the nerve,
triggers calcium-dependent transmitter release at the synapse,
produces graded postsynaptic potentials that are integrated to threshold,
and is terminated by transmitter removal — a chain from conduction to synaptic
integration that anaesthetic drugs modify throughout.
Give the approximate conduction velocities of the nerve fibre types.
The conduction velocity rises with diameter and with myelination,
so the fibre classes have characteristic speeds.
The large myelinated A-alpha fibres, carrying motor output and proprioception,
are the fastest, conducting at roughly seventy to a hundred and twenty metres per
second.
The A-beta fibres of touch and pressure conduct at around thirty to seventy metres
per second, and the A-gamma fibres to muscle spindles a little slower.
The smaller A-delta fibres, of fast sharp pain and temperature,
conduct at about five to thirty metres per second.
The small myelinated B fibres, the preganglionic autonomic fibres,
conduct at around three to fifteen metres per second.
The unmyelinated C fibres, of slow dull pain and postganglionic autonomic output,
are the slowest, at about half to two metres per second.
So conduction velocity ranges from the fastest A-alpha fibres at seventy to a
hundred and twenty metres per second, through the intermediate A-beta,
A-delta and B fibres, to the slowest unmyelinated C fibres at under two metres per
second — velocity tracking diameter and myelination, and correlating with function.
Describe the compound action potential.
The compound action potential is the recorded electrical response of a whole nerve
trunk to stimulation, representing the summed action potentials of its many
constituent fibres.
Because a nerve contains fibres of different types conducting at different
velocities, when the nerve is stimulated at one point and recorded at a distance,
the faster fibres' impulses arrive first and the slower ones later,
so the single synchronous volley spreads out into several separate peaks or waves
as it travels — the fast A fibres giving an early peak,
the B and C fibres later ones.
The compound action potential is therefore not all-or-none like a single fibre's,
but graded, since a stronger stimulus recruits more fibres.
Recording it allows the conduction velocities of the fibre populations to be
measured, used in nerve conduction studies.
So the compound action potential is the summed,
graded response of a whole nerve's many fibres,
separating into peaks because the different fibre types conduct at different speeds
— graded with stimulus strength and used clinically to assess nerve conduction,
in contrast to the all-or-none single-fibre response.
Describe quantal release of neurotransmitter.
Neurotransmitter is released not continuously but in discrete packets, or quanta,
each corresponding to the contents of one synaptic vesicle,
a concept established by Katz at the neuromuscular junction.
Even at rest, occasional single vesicles fuse spontaneously,
each releasing one quantum of transmitter and producing a tiny postsynaptic
depolarisation — the miniature end-plate potential.
When an action potential arrives and calcium enters,
it triggers the near-simultaneous release of many quanta,
and the resulting end-plate potential is the sum of these,
normally far exceeding threshold.
The number of quanta released depends on the calcium entry,
which is why transmission is so sensitive to calcium and to factors affecting it.
This quantal nature underlies the safety margin and its failure in disease.
So neurotransmitter is released in quanta, each a vesicle's worth,
demonstrated by the miniature end-plate potentials of spontaneous single-vesicle
release; an action potential, through calcium entry,
releases many quanta whose summed effect produces the postsynaptic potential — a
calcium-dependent quantal mechanism underlying the safety margin of transmission.
Describe presynaptic events in transmitter release in more detail.
The release of transmitter is a tightly orchestrated,
calcium-triggered process at the presynaptic terminal.
The synaptic vesicles, loaded with transmitter,
are docked at specialised release sites on the presynaptic membrane,
held ready by a complex of proteins, including the SNARE proteins,
which mediate vesicle fusion.
When the action potential depolarises the terminal, voltage-gated calcium channels,
located close to these release sites, open, and calcium enters to produce a brief,
high local concentration — a calcium microdomain — around the docked vesicles.
This calcium binds a sensor protein, synaptotagmin,
triggering the SNARE proteins to drive the rapid fusion of the vesicle with the
membrane and the release of its transmitter.
The vesicle membrane is then retrieved and recycled.
So presynaptic release is a calcium-triggered fusion:
vesicles are docked by SNARE proteins at release sites near the calcium channels,
and the action potential's calcium entry, forming a local microdomain,
is sensed by synaptotagmin to drive SNARE-mediated vesicle fusion and transmitter
release — a precise mechanism linking depolarisation to secretion.
What is synaptic delay, and why does it occur?
Synaptic delay is the brief interval — around half a millisecond — between the
arrival of the action potential at the presynaptic terminal and the beginning of
the postsynaptic response.
It occurs because chemical synaptic transmission involves several sequential steps
that take time, in contrast to the instantaneous transmission of an electrical
synapse.
The principal cause of the delay is the time taken for the voltage-gated calcium
channels to open, for calcium to enter,
and for it to trigger vesicle fusion and transmitter release;
the subsequent diffusion across the narrow cleft and binding to receptors is
comparatively fast.
This delay is significant because, in a pathway involving many synapses in series,
the delays accumulate, and it is one reason chemical transmission is slower than
conduction along an axon.
So synaptic delay is the half-millisecond lag between presynaptic action potential
and postsynaptic response, caused chiefly by the time for calcium channels to open
and trigger transmitter release; it accumulates across multi-synaptic pathways and
is a feature distinguishing chemical from electrical synapses.
Describe facilitation, post-tetanic potentiation and synaptic plasticity.
Synapses are not fixed relays but can change their strength with use,
a property called synaptic plasticity, important in modulation, learning and memory.
Facilitation is a short-lived increase in transmitter release when a second impulse
arrives soon after a first, because residual calcium from the first remains in the
terminal and adds to the calcium of the second, releasing more transmitter.
Post-tetanic potentiation is a longer-lasting enhancement of release following a
burst of high-frequency stimulation, again from accumulated calcium.
Conversely, depression can occur from depletion of readily releasable vesicles.
Longer-term changes, long-term potentiation and depression,
underlie learning and memory. These phenomena have clinical relevance — for
example, the post-tetanic facilitation seen when monitoring neuromuscular block.
So synapses show plasticity: facilitation and post-tetanic potentiation increase
release through residual and accumulated calcium,
depression reduces it through vesicle depletion,
and long-term changes underlie memory — use-dependent changes in synaptic strength,
some directly relevant to neuromuscular monitoring.
How is synaptic transmission modulated presynaptically?
Beyond the basic relay, transmission is extensively modulated,
much of it presynaptically, allowing fine control of release.
Presynaptic receptors on the nerve terminal respond to transmitters and modulators
to alter the amount of transmitter released.
Autoreceptors respond to the neurone's own released transmitter,
usually inhibiting further release as negative feedback — as the alpha-two
adrenoceptor reduces noradrenaline release.
Heteroreceptors respond to other transmitters,
allowing one neurone to modulate another's release — the basis of presynaptic
inhibition and of much drug action,
such as the opioid inhibition of transmitter release in pain pathways.
Presynaptic modulation typically works by altering calcium entry or potassium
channels in the terminal.
So synaptic transmission is modulated presynaptically through receptors on the
terminal — autoreceptors giving negative feedback on the neurone's own release,
and heteroreceptors allowing modulation by other transmitters — generally by
altering calcium entry, a major site of physiological control and of drug action
such as that of the alpha-two agonists and opioids.
Compare ionotropic and metabotropic receptors.
Postsynaptic, and other, receptors fall into two broad classes differing in
mechanism and speed.
Ionotropic receptors are ligand-gated ion channels:
the receptor and the ion channel are one and the same protein,
so binding of the transmitter directly opens the channel, producing a fast,
brief postsynaptic response within milliseconds — the nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor, the glutamate AMPA and NMDA receptors,
and the GABA-A and glycine receptors are examples.
Metabotropic receptors are G-protein-coupled receptors:
binding of the transmitter does not open a channel directly but activates an
intracellular G protein and second-messenger cascade,
which then modulates channels or enzymes, giving a slower,
longer-lasting and often amplifying and modulatory response — the muscarinic,
adrenergic, GABA-B and many other receptors.
So ionotropic receptors are ligand-gated channels giving fast, direct,
brief responses, while metabotropic receptors are G-protein-coupled, giving slower,
sustained, amplified and modulatory effects through second messengers — the two
mechanisms underlying fast point-to-point transmission and slower modulation
respectively, and both being drug targets.
Describe Wallerian degeneration and nerve regeneration.
When a peripheral axon is severed or badly injured, the part distal to the injury,
cut off from the cell body, undergoes Wallerian degeneration:
over days the distal axon and its myelin break down and are cleared by macrophages
and the Schwann cells, leaving the endoneurial tube and Schwann cells behind.
The peripheral nervous system has a capacity for regeneration that the central
nervous system largely lacks.
From the proximal stump, the axon sprouts and,
guided by the surviving Schwann cells and the endoneurial tube,
may regrow down the original path at a slow rate of about a millimetre a day,
eventually re-innervating the target if the tube is intact and the gap small.
Recovery is better with crush injuries, where the tube is preserved,
than with complete transection.
So Wallerian degeneration is the breakdown and clearance of the axon distal to an
injury; the peripheral nerve can then regenerate,
the proximal axon regrowing along the surviving Schwann-cell tube at about a
millimetre a day — a capacity for repair, better after crush than transection,
that the central nervous system largely lacks.
Summarise the integration of conduction and transmission in the nervous system.
I would summarise it as a system that combines fast,
faithful conduction along axons with versatile,
modifiable transmission at synapses to compute and control.
Information travels rapidly and reliably along axons as all-or-none action
potentials, the speed set by myelination and diameter and the fibre type matched to
its function.
At synapses, this electrical signal is converted,
through calcium-triggered quantal transmitter release,
into a chemical signal that can be excitatory or inhibitory, graded,
integrated by spatial and temporal summation,
and modulated presynaptically and by plasticity — so that neurones do not merely
relay but compute, weighing many inputs to decide whether to fire.
Fast ionotropic and slow metabotropic receptors serve point-to-point transmission
and modulation. This architecture is the substrate on which anaesthetic and
analgesic drugs act.
So the nervous system integrates fast, reliable axonal conduction with slow,
modifiable, integrative synaptic transmission — conduction carrying the signal,
the synapse computing and modulating it — a combination giving both speed and
flexibility, and providing the many sites at which anaesthetic drugs act.
Describe gap junctions and electrical synapses in more detail.
Gap junctions are specialised intercellular connections that allow direct
electrical and chemical communication between adjacent cells,
forming the basis of electrical synapses.
Each gap junction is an array of channels,
every channel formed by the pairing of two half-channels, or connexons,
one contributed by each cell, aligning to create a continuous aqueous pore between
the two cytoplasms.
These pores allow ions and small molecules to pass directly from cell to cell,
so that current flows almost instantaneously and bidirectionally,
without the delay or the chemical step of a chemical synapse.
They are found where rapid, synchronised activity is needed: in cardiac muscle,
allowing the heart to behave as a functional syncytium and contract in unison;
in some smooth muscle; and between certain neurones and glia.
So gap junctions are arrays of channels, each formed by paired connexons,
that directly link the cytoplasms of adjacent cells, allowing fast,
bidirectional passage of ions and small molecules — the basis of electrical
synapses and of the synchronised, syncytial behaviour of cardiac and some smooth
muscle, contrasting with the slower, modifiable chemical synapse.
Distinguish neurotransmitters from neuromodulators.
Both are chemical messengers released by neurones, but they differ in their action.
A classical neurotransmitter is released at a synapse and acts rapidly and briefly
on receptors on the immediately adjacent postsynaptic membrane,
producing a discrete, point-to-point signal — typically opening ionotropic channels
to cause a fast postsynaptic potential, as with glutamate or acetylcholine.
A neuromodulator, by contrast, acts more slowly, more diffusely and for longer,
not to transmit a discrete signal but to modulate the responsiveness of neurones —
altering their excitability or the strength of their synaptic transmission;
it often acts through metabotropic,
G-protein-coupled receptors and second messengers,
and may diffuse to act at a distance on many neurones.
Many monoamines and neuropeptides act as modulators.
The same substance can act as either, depending on context.
So a neurotransmitter gives fast, brief, point-to-point synaptic signalling,
usually through ionotropic receptors, whereas a neuromodulator produces slower,
diffuse, longer-lasting changes in neuronal excitability and synaptic strength,
usually through metabotropic receptors — transmission versus modulation,
though the same molecule may do either.
Describe glutamate, the NMDA receptor and excitotoxicity.
Glutamate is the principal excitatory neurotransmitter of the central nervous
system, acting on several receptor types,
of which the AMPA and NMDA receptors are key.
The AMPA receptor is a fast ionotropic receptor mediating ordinary excitatory
transmission.
The NMDA receptor is also ionotropic but distinctive:
it is both ligand- and voltage-gated,
for at the resting potential its channel is blocked by magnesium,
which is expelled only when the cell is already depolarised,
so it opens only when glutamate binds and the cell is depolarised — acting as a
coincidence detector important in synaptic plasticity and learning.
When open it admits calcium as well as sodium.
Excitotoxicity is the cell injury caused by excessive glutamate, as in ischaemia:
overactivation of NMDA receptors floods the cell with calcium,
triggering destructive enzymes and cell death.
Ketamine and nitrous oxide are NMDA antagonists.
So glutamate is the chief excitatory transmitter;
the NMDA receptor is a ligand- and voltage-gated,
calcium-permeable receptor acting as a coincidence detector in plasticity,
whose overactivation causes calcium-mediated excitotoxic cell death in ischaemia —
and which ketamine and nitrous oxide block.
Compare GABA-A and GABA-B receptors.
Gamma-aminobutyric acid is the principal inhibitory neurotransmitter of the brain,
and it acts on two receptor types that differ in mechanism,
in keeping with the ionotropic-metabotropic division.
The GABA-A receptor is ionotropic — a ligand-gated ion channel that,
on binding gamma-aminobutyric acid, opens to allow chloride into the cell,
hyperpolarising it and producing fast inhibition;
it is the site of action of many anaesthetic drugs, the benzodiazepines,
barbiturates, propofol and the volatile agents all potentiating its function,
enhancing inhibition.
The GABA-B receptor is metabotropic — a G-protein-coupled receptor that,
through second messengers, opens potassium channels and inhibits calcium channels,
producing slower, more prolonged inhibition,
both postsynaptically and presynaptically; baclofen is a GABA-B agonist.
So the GABA-A receptor is a fast ionotropic chloride channel mediating rapid
inhibition and is the major target of anaesthetic potentiation,
whereas the GABA-B receptor is a slower metabotropic receptor acting through
potassium and calcium channels — the two arms of GABA-mediated inhibition,
the ionotropic one being central to anaesthesia.
Describe the role of glial cells.
Glial cells are the non-neuronal cells of the nervous system,
far outnumbering the neurones, and far from being mere packing they are essential
to neuronal function.
In the central nervous system, the astrocytes provide structural and metabolic
support, regulate the extracellular environment — buffering potassium and taking up
neurotransmitters such as glutamate to terminate their action — and contribute to
the blood-brain barrier.
The oligodendrocytes form the myelin of central axons, each myelinating several.
The microglia are the immune cells of the brain, the resident macrophages.
The ependymal cells line the ventricles and help form cerebrospinal fluid.
In the peripheral nervous system, the Schwann cells form myelin and support axons
and their regeneration.
So glial cells — astrocytes supporting neurones and regulating their environment
and the blood-brain barrier, oligodendrocytes and Schwann cells forming central and
peripheral myelin, microglia serving immune defence,
and ependymal cells lining the ventricles — are indispensable partners of the
neurones, providing support, insulation, environmental regulation and defence.
Describe the reflex arc as an example of neural integration.
The reflex arc is the basic functional unit of the nervous system's automatic
responses, an example of integration at its simplest, comprising five elements.
A receptor detects the stimulus. An afferent,
sensory neurone conducts the signal to the central nervous system.
There, an integrating centre processes it — in the simplest, monosynaptic reflex,
such as the stretch reflex, the afferent neurone synapses directly onto the
efferent neurone, while most reflexes interpose one or more interneurones,
allowing integration.
An efferent, motor neurone conducts the response outward.
An effector — a muscle or gland — carries it out.
The stretch reflex, in which stretching a muscle excites its spindle to cause
reflex contraction, is the basis of the tendon jerks used clinically,
and reciprocal inhibition simultaneously relaxes the antagonist.
So the reflex arc — receptor, afferent neurone, integrating centre,
efferent neurone and effector — produces automatic responses,
illustrating neural integration from the simple monosynaptic stretch reflex to
polysynaptic reflexes with interneurones, the substrate of much rapid,
unconscious control.
How are neurotransmitters synthesised, stored and recycled?
The supply of neurotransmitter is sustained by an orderly cycle of synthesis,
storage, release and recycling within the presynaptic terminal.
The small-molecule transmitters — acetylcholine, the amino acids,
the monoamines — are synthesised locally in the terminal from precursors taken up
from the blood or recovered from the cleft, by specific enzymes; for example,
acetylcholine is made from choline and acetyl-coenzyme A by choline
acetyltransferase.
The transmitter is then concentrated and stored within synaptic vesicles by
vesicular transporters, protecting it and packaging it in quanta ready for release.
On stimulation it is released by calcium-triggered exocytosis.
After acting, it is cleared from the cleft — by enzymatic degradation or,
for many transmitters, by reuptake into the terminal,
where it or its precursors are reused to refill vesicles — and the vesicle membrane
is retrieved and recycled.
So neurotransmitters are synthesised in the terminal by specific enzymes,
stored in quanta within vesicles by vesicular transporters,
released by calcium-triggered exocytosis,
and recycled by reuptake and vesicle retrieval — an efficient cycle that sustains
transmission, every step of which is a potential drug target.
What is receptor desensitisation at the synapse?
Desensitisation is the diminishing of a receptor's response despite the continued
presence of its agonist, a rapid and usually reversible form of adaptation distinct
from the slower up- and down-regulation of receptor numbers.
At the level of the receptor protein,
continued or repeated exposure to the agonist causes the receptor to enter a
desensitised conformation in which, although the agonist remains bound,
the channel no longer opens or the signal is no longer transduced.
At the nicotinic receptor of the neuromuscular junction this is clinically
relevant: the persistent agonism of a depolarising blocker, or repeated dosing,
can cause a desensitisation block, contributing to the phase-two block seen with
prolonged or repeated suxamethonium.
Desensitisation protects against overstimulation and shapes responses.
So desensitisation is a rapid, reversible loss of receptor response during
continued agonist exposure, the receptor adopting an unresponsive conformation
while still bound; at the neuromuscular junction it contributes to the phase-two
block of prolonged depolarising blockade — an adaptation distinct from changes in
receptor number and of pharmacological importance.
Summarise the principles of synaptic transmission as drug targets.
I would summarise the synapse as offering, at each step of transmission,
a target for drugs, which is why so much pharmacology acts here.
Transmitter synthesis and storage can be altered.
Release can be modulated — increased or,
as by presynaptic autoreceptors and by the action of some agents, decreased.
The postsynaptic receptors can be activated by agonists or blocked by antagonists,
whether the fast ionotropic receptors,
as the neuromuscular blockers block the nicotinic receptor and anaesthetics
potentiate the GABA-A receptor, or the metabotropic receptors.
The termination of action can be prolonged by inhibiting the degrading enzyme,
as the anticholinesterases inhibit acetylcholinesterase,
or the reuptake transporter, as antidepressants inhibit monoamine reuptake.
And modulatory systems can be engaged,
as opioids inhibit transmission in pain pathways.
So synaptic transmission is a rich source of drug targets at every step —
synthesis, storage, release, receptor activation or blockade,
and termination by enzyme or reuptake inhibition — the basis of the action of
neuromuscular blockers, anticholinesterases, anaesthetics,
opioids and many other agents, making the synapse central to anaesthetic
pharmacology.
What is co-transmission?
Co-transmission is the release by a single neurone of more than one chemical
messenger, which then act together on the target,
a refinement of the older idea that each neurone released only one transmitter.
Typically a classical small-molecule transmitter is released together with one or
more neuropeptides, or with other small molecules,
often stored in distinct vesicle populations and released differentially according
to the pattern and frequency of firing — the peptides tending to require
higher-frequency activity for their release.
The co-released messengers commonly act over different timescales,
the fast transmitter giving the immediate signal and the peptide a slower,
modulatory effect, allowing a single neurone to produce a richer,
frequency-dependent range of effects.
Many autonomic and central neurones use co-transmission — for example,
the co-release of adenosine triphosphate and neuropeptides with noradrenaline in
sympathetic nerves.
So co-transmission is the release of more than one messenger by a neurone —
commonly a fast classical transmitter with a slower modulatory peptide,
released in a frequency-dependent way — enabling a single neurone to exert
combined, multi-timescale effects on its target,
a widespread feature of autonomic and central transmission.
Describe the blood-nerve and blood-brain barriers.
The nervous system is protected by specialised barriers that control the entry of
substances from the blood, maintaining a stable environment for neuronal function.
The blood-brain barrier, in the central nervous system,
is formed chiefly by the capillary endothelial cells,
which are joined by tight junctions that prevent the free passage of substances
between them, supported by the surrounding astrocyte foot-processes and pericytes;
so substances must cross through the cells, and only small,
lipid-soluble molecules — and those for which specific transporters exist,
such as glucose — pass readily, while large or polar molecules are excluded.
The blood-nerve barrier performs the analogous function in peripheral nerves,
formed by the perineurium and by tight junctions of the endoneurial capillaries.
These barriers protect the nervous tissue but also restrict the access of drugs.
So the blood-brain barrier, formed by tight-junctioned capillary endothelium with
astrocyte support, and the analogous blood-nerve barrier of peripheral nerves,
restrict entry to small lipid-soluble molecules and specific transported substances
— protecting the stable neural environment but limiting drug access,
a key pharmacological consideration.
Why does the central nervous system regenerate so poorly compared with the
peripheral?
The contrast in regenerative capacity is striking:
a severed peripheral axon can often regrow and re-innervate its target,
whereas axons in the brain and spinal cord generally fail to regenerate,
so central injury tends to be permanent.
The difference lies chiefly in the environment the regrowing axon meets.
In the peripheral nerve, the Schwann cells survive, clear debris,
and form a supportive pathway — the endoneurial tube — secreting growth factors
that guide and encourage regrowth.
In the central nervous system, by contrast,
the myelin-forming oligodendrocytes and the reactive astrocytes create an
inhibitory environment: central myelin contains molecules that actively inhibit
axon growth, and the reactive astrocytes form a dense glial scar that is both a
physical and a chemical barrier.
The intrinsic growth capacity of central neurones is also limited.
So the central nervous system regenerates poorly because,
unlike the supportive Schwann-cell environment of peripheral nerve,
central injury produces an inhibitory environment — growth-inhibiting myelin
molecules and an obstructive glial scar — together with limited intrinsic neuronal
growth capacity, which is why central injury is usually permanent.
Thank you. A clear account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, A peripheral nerve fibre is an axon with its excitable membrane,
either myelinated (concentric Schwann-cell wrapping interrupted at the nodes of
Ranvier, where sodium channels concentrate) or unmyelinated,
bundled in connective-tissue sheaths (endo-, peri- and epineurium).
Second, Fibres are classified by diameter, myelination and velocity:
A fibres (large, myelinated, fast — alpha motor/proprioception, beta touch,
gamma spindles, delta fast pain/temperature),
B fibres (small myelinated preganglionic autonomic), C fibres (smallest,
unmyelinated, slow — dull pain, postganglionic autonomic);
local anaesthetics block autonomic, then pain/temperature, then touch, then motor,
whereas compression affects large fibres first.
Third, Chemical synapses predominate over electrical (gap-junction) synapses
because, despite their delay, they are unidirectional, amplifiable,
integrative and modifiable; transmission is:
action potential → voltage-gated calcium entry → vesicle fusion and transmitter
release → postsynaptic receptor binding → excitatory/inhibitory potential →
transmitter clearance.
4.
Main transmitters: acetylcholine (NMJ, autonomic),
glutamate (chief excitatory — AMPA/NMDA),
GABA and glycine (chief inhibitory — chloride channels), modulatory monoamines;
postsynaptic potentials are graded EPSPs/IPSPs integrated by temporal and spatial
summation, firing an action potential only if the sum reaches threshold;
transmission is terminated by enzymatic degradation (acetylcholinesterase),
reuptake (monoamines) and diffusion.
Fourth, Synaptic transmission is a principal anaesthetic target:
most general anaesthetics enhance GABA-A inhibition (benzodiazepines, propofol,
volatiles) or block NMDA excitation (ketamine, nitrous oxide);
neuromuscular blockers and anticholinesterases act at the NMJ;
opioids inhibit pain-pathway synapses — the synapse being where most anaesthetic
drugs ultimately act.
Thank you. That concludes the station.